basics chapter (#14)
G1ANT-Robot/G1ANT.Manual: g1ant-language/language-basics.md

# Basics

When you learn new language, you always start with basics: pronunciation, spelling, fundamental vocabulary, general rules of constructing sentences and expressing your thoughts. The same applies to any programming language, where you learn its commands, arguments, syntax and all the rules that make it logical.

G1ANT.Language is no different, so before you start creating robots, you must know the foundations, on which you can build your scripts. We will guide you through language basics and present you with the elementary tools, which help you in writing your code.

## Workspace

> G1ANT.Robot program offers you powerful and convenient tools to help you master all aspects of programming in G1ANT.Language.

Reviewer: SUGGESTION: ..all aspects of programming in G1ANT.Language **to robotise and automate common and repetitive tasks**.

Author: ```suggestion
G1ANT.Robot program offers you powerful and convenient tools to help you master all aspects of programming in G1ANT.Language to robotize and automate common and repetitive tasks.
```

### Suggestions and Tooltips

The script editor is equipped with IntelliSense technology, which gives you suggestions while you type. It’s an extremely comfortable and productive variation of an interactive help.

> How does it work? When you start typing, IntelliSense looks for matches in the G1ANT.Language dictionary and displays them in a drop-down list. A description of the selected item appears in a tooltip — a small box to the right with a brief explanation of what a particular function does.

Author: 1. Perhaps we don't want to make a mess in users' minds with separations like Language, Core, Addon, so it's better to change it to: "IntelliSense looks for matches in the language dictionary"
2. Too long and detailed. "A brief explanation of what a particular element does" would be better

> How does it work? When you start typing, IntelliSense looks for matches in the G1ANT.Language dictionary and displays them in a drop-down list. A description of the selected item appears in a tooltip — a small box to the right with a brief explanation of what a particular function does.

Reviewer 2: 👍

### Keyboard shortcuts

They help you to work faster — simple as that. Instead of moving around menus and clicking, use keystroke combinations to get what you want in a fraction of time. Keyboard shortcuts for menu items are shown next to them in the menus, and next to special characters in Symbols panel. For example, instead of navigating to `Edit/Find` menu for a Find tool, you can simply press **Ctrl+F** keys.

You can also find all [common keyboard shortcuts](appendices/common-keyboard-shortcuts.md) (typical for Windows and its applications) as well as [Windows key shortcuts](appendices/windows-key-shortcuts.md) in our Appendices section.

## Language Syntax

G1ANT.Language syntax is pure and simple:

```G1ANT
command argument value 
```

> As you can see, you always start with a command followed by its argument and then a value of that argument. Compare this with natural language: if you say *“pass this to me”*, “pass” would be a command, “this” — an argument, “to me” — value.

Author: You're probably right. This example was simplified AMAP. I guess I'll change to your cat version :D

> As you can see, you always start with a command followed by its argument and then a value of that argument. Compare this with natural language: if you say *“pass this to me”*, “pass” would be a command, “this” — an argument, “to me” — value.

Reviewer 2: 👍

Now, let’s learn who is who — or rather what is what.

### Command

Is an instruction given by a user telling the robot to do something — for example, run a program or perform keyboard or mouse action. You could compare commands to verbs in natural language.

A command can be simple, one-word, like `dialog` or extended, like `selenium.open`. Two-word commands separated with a dot in the middle belong to a family of commands. It means that there are other commands starting with `selenium.` and their suffix (the part following the dot) expresses certain activity: `open`, `newtab` ,`switch`.

Each family of commands has its special ‘activities’. Once you start typing the command inside the script editor window, a list of available activities will pop up, as you can see below:

![](.gitbook/assets/selenium.png)

### Argument

> A command needs to know, what exactly it is supposed to do. So, you must provide some information — and this data is called an *argument*. For example, when you type `program`, the robot will suggest you next input in a drop-down list and the first item will be `name`. It is an argument for the `program` command followed with a name of the program to be launched. So, if you wanted the robot to open Notepad, you would write `program name notepad` — remember the “command argument value” rule?

Author: OK, but not "sometimes", rather "most often" or "usually"

> A command needs to know, what exactly it is supposed to do. So, you must provide some information — and this data is called an *argument*. For example, when you type `program`, the robot will suggest you next input in a drop-down list and the first item will be `name`. It is an argument for the `program` command followed with a name of the program to be launched. So, if you wanted the robot to open Notepad, you would write `program name notepad` — remember the “command argument value” rule?

Reviewer 2: 👍

### Value

The content of a field or a variable is called a *value*. It can refer to alphabetic as well as numeric data. For example, in the expression

```G1ANT
selenium.open type ‴firefox‴ url ‴google.com‴ result ♥google
```

the elements `‴firefox‴` and `‴google.com‴` are values. Note that text values are embraced with triple prime characters available by pressing **Ctrl+'** (apostrophe) keyboard shortcut or by clicking the text symbol icon on the toolbar.

Values always belong to one type of structures, [variables](), and they can be any text, numbers and a mixture of both (URL address, for instance). Values are strictly related to their arguments.

### Examples

In the following example the golden “command-argument-value” rule is a bit twisted:

```G1ANT
text.read c:\Users\♥USERNAME\Desktop\g1ant.txt result ♥g1
```

> The `text.read` command is immediately followed by a value (`c:\Users\♥USERNAME\Desktop\g1ant.txt`), not an argument. It’s because some argument names can be omitted, since they are obvious and mandatory. In this case, the missing argument name is `filename`, which is followed by a value with the name of a file to open. Then, there is the `result` argument and its `♥g1` value.

Author: arguments or argument names are the thing to discuss further

> The `text.read` command is immediately followed by a value (`c:\Users\♥USERNAME\Desktop\g1ant.txt`), not an argument. It’s because some argument names can be omitted, since they are obvious and mandatory. In this case, the missing argument name is `filename`, which is followed by a value with the name of a file to open. Then, there is the `result` argument and its `♥g1` value.

Author: ```suggestion
The `text.read` command is immediately followed by a value (`c:\Users\♥USERNAME\Desktop\g1ant.txt`), not an argument. It’s because first arguments can be omitted, since they are obvious. In this case, the missing argument is `filename`, which is followed by a value with the name of a file to open. Then, there is the `result` argument and its `♥g1` value.
```

Other examples of arguments that can be skipped and replaced by their values, include `name` for the `program` command (which specifies the program to be launched) or `title` for the `window`command (which specifies the title of the window to focus on):

`program notepad` instead of `program name notepad`

> `window *chrome` instead of `window title *chrome`

Author: you're absolutely right, although the ordinary asterisk works as well :D. OK, I'll change that document wide, the search place symbol should be introduced

> `window *chrome` instead of `window title *chrome`

Reviewer 2: 👍

> Note the asterisk before `chrome`: it serves as a wildcard for all characters preceding the word “chrome”, so that any Google Chrome browser window would be selected no matter what its full title is.

Author: ```suggestion
Note the special asterisk symbol before `chrome`: it's called Search Place and serves as a wildcard for all characters preceding the word “chrome”, so that any Google Chrome browser window would be selected no matter what its full title is. You can enter this character from `Insert/Search Place` menu, with **Ctrl+8** keyboard shortcut or by clicking the ✱ icon on the toolbar.
```

```G1ANT
♥number = 2
♥total = ♥number + ♥number
dialog ♥total
```

You will see a dialog box displaying `4`. In the first line you defined a `♥number` variable equal to `2`. In the next line you defined a `♥total` variable, which is a sum of two `♥number` variables. Since 2 and 2 make 4, the `dialog` command will bring up a dialog box showing `4` as the value of the `♥total` variable.

Now you know what a variable is and how to generally use it in G1ANT.Language. And not only just that: you also used the `dialog` command to bring up a dialog box with a message. It’s about time to move on to more exciting stuff involving interaction with user interface.

## Using UI Commands

As an RPA software, G1ANT.Robot has to deal with the user interface of the host operating system, pretending to be a human sitting in the front of a PC. It includes many commands designed to mimic user activity in Windows and its applications. For example, the robot can launch programs, open dialog boxes, ask user for some input, select application windows, enter keystrokes, move mouse cursor and many more.

> For the purpose of this introductory guide, let’s take a look at the most fundamental UI commands in G1ANT.Language: `dialog` and `dialog.ask`, `keyboard`, `mouse.`, `program` and `window`.

Author: Sure, but in this case the sense seems to be pretty much obvious. For the sake of clarity, I can change it to "UI-related commands"

> For the purpose of this introductory guide, let’s take a look at the most fundamental UI commands in G1ANT.Language: `dialog` and `dialog.ask`, `keyboard`, `mouse.`, `program` and `window`.

Reviewer 2: 👍

Try this script:

```G1ANT
program notepad
keyboard ‴Hello! I'm a robot.‴
```

The first line opens Windows Notepad and the second line enters a text into it.

In case of the `program` command, the most obvious argument is a _name_ of the program to be launched by the robot. This name can be given in a short form such as `notepad`, `calc`, `chrome`, `word` (provided that these programs are installed in the system) or with a full path to the executable file, eg. `‴C:\Program Files\Internet Explorer\iexplore.exe‴` (again, note the triple prime character `‴` embracing the path — it's a special sign used in G1ANT.Robot for values containing spaces; to enter it, press **Ctrl** and apostrophe **'** key).

> Sending keyboard inputs to a program is easy and requires the `keyboard` command followed by the text to be entered or keyboard shorG1ANTtcuts/function keys to be mimicked by the robot.

Author: a bug :D

> Sending keyboard inputs to a program is easy and requires the `keyboard` command followed by the text to be entered or keyboard shorG1ANTtcuts/function keys to be mimicked by the robot.

Reviewer 2: 👍

The answer is simple: in the next line after your existing `program notepad` command, you would type

```G1ANT
keyboard ‴Hello!⋘enter⋙I'm a robot.‴
```

Did you notice `⋘enter⋙`? These triple quotation angles (available with **Ctrl+<** and **Ctrl+>** keyboard shortcuts or from the toolbar) indicate a function key or a keyboard shortcut — **Enter** key in this example.

The `keyboard` command is not that primitive as you might think. Well, it is, considering the way it works, but these simple keyboard inputs are much more powerful when you start using keyboard shortcuts. Why? Because every program uses keyboard alternatives for its menus, tools and functions. You only need to find them and pass to your robot.

Let's go back to your simple Notepad robot. Its code looks like this:

```G1ANT
program notepad
keyboard ‴Hello!⋘enter⋙I'm a robot.‴
```

Now you could use common Windows shortcuts such as **Ctrl+C** (copy to clipboard), **Ctrl+S** (save to a file) or **Alt+F4** (close program) to make the robot perform respective tasks. But Notepad allows you to do many other things: all of its tools are accessible with keyboard alternatives, which show up after pressing **Alt** key.

> Run your robot by pressing **F9**. With Notepad open, you can investigate available keyboard options: press **Alt** key and look at the menu bar. First menu item, `File`, is depressed and all menu items have one letter in their names underlined. Now you can use arrow keys to navigate through menus or press the underlined letter to select a desired menu item. Fo example, if you wanted to activate word wrapping option, which is available in the `Format` menu, you would have to press **O** key (the underlined letter of the Format menu), then **W** in the dropped-down Format menu to select the `Word Wrap` item. The robot command sequence for these keystrokes would look like this:

Author: I honestly don't know what I meant by "depressed". Probably "selected" :)

> Run your robot by pressing **F9**. With Notepad open, you can investigate available keyboard options: press **Alt** key and look at the menu bar. First menu item, `File`, is depressed and all menu items have one letter in their names underlined. Now you can use arrow keys to navigate through menus or press the underlined letter to select a desired menu item. Fo example, if you wanted to activate word wrapping option, which is available in the `Format` menu, you would have to press **O** key (the underlined letter of the Format menu), then **W** in the dropped-down Format menu to select the `Word Wrap` item. The robot command sequence for these keystrokes would look like this:

Reviewer 2: 👍

The command responsible for selecting a proper window is — guess what? — the `window` command. Not only it brings focus to the window specified by the `title` argument, but it can also set this window’s size (`maximized`, `minimized` or `restored` from minimized) with the `style` argument.

Let’s see `window` and `mouse.` commands in action. For example, you want to select some text in an application. It could be a PDF file with content you can select with a mouse, but not with a keyboard, or part of an email in a browser window. The algorithm for this process would look like that:

1. Select the desired window.
2. Move the cursor to the starting point of the text.
3. Press down the left mouse button and start dragging the cursor over the desired area.
4. Release the mouse button.
5. Copy the selected text.
6. Paste it to the target application.

For the purpose of this exercise, we will stick to the good old Notepad and the previous example. Assume you have an open Notepad window with *“Hello! I’m a robot.”* in it. Let’s try to select *“a robot”* with `mouse.` commands.

First, you have to select the right window:

```G1ANT

> window *notepad

Author: :+1:

> window *notepad

Reviewer 2: 👍

```

> > This command will work correctly only when there’s just one Notepad window open. If you have more of them, you must precisely specify the window you want to use, e.g. `window ‴Untitled - Notepad‴`. The full list of open windows titles is available in [All Windows](g1ant.robot-window/auxiliary-windows/all-windows.md) tool (`Tools/Window` menu or **Ctrl+W**).

Author: yep

> > This command will work correctly only when there’s just one Notepad window open. If you have more of them, you must precisely specify the window you want to use, e.g. `window ‴Untitled - Notepad‴`. The full list of open windows titles is available in [All Windows](g1ant.robot-window/auxiliary-windows/all-windows.md) tool (`Tools/Window` menu or **Ctrl+W**).

Reviewer 2: 👍

```G1
mouse.click ⟦point⟧41⫽70 type down
```

> Note that your coordinate values can be a bit different from the ones given here.

Confused with the lack of the `button` argument? You probably expected `mouse.click ⟦point⟧41⫽70 button left type down`, didn’t you? Well, you could use it, but it may be skipped in this case, because `left` is the default value. Likewise, if you wanted just to make a mouse click, you could also skip the `type` argument — `press` is its default value.

Now you should tell the robot to move the mouse cursor to the end of the “robot” word and stop selection by releasing the mouse button. Again, use the Mouse Position tool to insert the right coordinates:

```G1
mouse.click ⟦point⟧98⫽71 type up
```

OK, you have your text selected. Now copy it and paste somewhere else — in another Notepad window, for example:

```G1ANT
keyboard ⋘CTRL+C⋙
program notepad
keyboard ⋘CTRL+V⋙
```

And that’s it! Your whole script should look like this:

```G1

> window *notepad

Author: :+1:

mouse.click ⟦point⟧41⫽70 type down
mouse.click ⟦point⟧98⫽71 type up
keyboard ⋘CTRL+C⋙
program notepad

> keyboard ⋘CTRL+V⋙

Author: yes, but not here, where I wanted to use just the already explained commands

> keyboard ⋘CTRL+V⋙

Reviewer 2: sure :D
